why'd it take so long to invoke the
defense production you know hospitals
are supposed to have ventilators too and
when we have thousands of ventilators it
sounds like a lot but this is a very
unforeseen thing nobody ever thought of
these numbers it depends it depends on
how it goes
worst case absolutely the best case not
not at all
so we're gonna have to see where it goes
but we are ordering thousands and
thousands of ventilators hospitals are
supposed to have ventilators too joining
us now Morning Joe chief medical
correspondent dr. Dave Campbell and dr.
Vanessa Kerry the CEO of cede global
health a nonprofit that helps train
future doctors and nurses in countries
with limited healthcare resources great
to have you both on the show this
Vanessa you've heard reports doctors
being told to actually tear off parts of
their their their their gown
you wrap use it as a makeshift mask to
bring bandanas from home could you ever
imagine that this would be happening in
the United States of America at one of
our most trying times now I couldn't at
all and I think that the reality is that
we are in we're facing an existential
threat that we have not experienced in
generations and arguably that we have
never experienced because of
globalization the size of our population
in the world but the truth is this is
really a crisis of several proportions
one the fear that we are going to get
sick it is a crisis of the preparedness
that we have here is an economic crisis
it's an information and misinformation
crisis but it's most fundamentally a
crisis of leadership and that I think is
what people are feeling the most and
what is fomenting so much of the panic
occluding among my colleagues at Mass
General Hospital and elsewhere who are
going to be on the front lines David
that grace is at the level of our
administration yeah dr. Dave I want to
be very careful here I'm not going to
mention any names but we had a
conversation
tonight you have a colleague that you've
known for three decades now extremely
respected professional who got a call
from one of his colleagues in Italy
asking for any help in getting
ventilators over to Italy he placed a
call to somebody that he knew who worked
for a company that mass-produced
ventilators and that company had been
told I guess in early February that they
were going to be sending all of their
orders to China and that a whole mass
collection of ventilators that the
Chinese government had called up and
said will buy all of your ventilators
through June without revealing any of
these names because we're working the
story right now tell us about that and
tell us what you learned by talking to
the person involved in this about just
how difficult it is to mass-produce
ventilators in the why you are now so
skeptical of the government's claims
thanks Joe
the this is a story of China being first
to the plate in the development and need
for ventilators so in mid-february this
company received an order for 1,000
ventilators from China they had 20 to 30
in stock they supplied those the order
then went in to manufacture 100
ventilators per week over the next 10
weeks if that's a thousand ventilators
if you were to call this major company
today and asked to order ventilators for
a company or hospital or medical center
in the United States or Italy which is
what happened there's no supply until
June so it it's not a condemnation of
China asking for these ventilators they
needed them they need them now they just
needed them two months before the United
States and Italy Joe yeah and and Myka
this is this company
is a major multinational corporation and
one of the best non-american companies
that there are but again they're not
going to be producing ventilators for
the United States and for American
patients through June they're going to
be working in effect for China and as we
flush out this story we'll see just how
complicated it is it's not just you
don't just deliver ventilators and make
them they have parts that parts need to
be replaced constantly this is a crisis
that could have been slightly averted
and instead we're caught flat-footed
it's going to be the next big Mis first
was testing which we still don't have
the second is going to be hospital space
supplies ventilators and masks and it's
why everybody's uncertain especially the
markets dr. Kerry seed Global Health
sends doctors into third world areas to
train people in those third-world
countries to try and deliver their own
healthcare do you envision medical
students at this point being mobilized
because we have a healthcare workforce
that right now is blatantly being
exposed to the corona virus I think this
is what's really complicated is that
we're asking health care workers like my
colleagues myself soon when I have to go
to the hospital that we are gonna be
working in a situation where we don't
have the protective equipment we need
and I think that that's gonna be a real
problem because what's gonna happen is
as we get infected and we get pulled
from the healthcare workforce you
probably won't see medical students but
you will see potentially your
dermatologist a colleague of mine who is
a dermatologist recently said I feel
like I need to brush up on my pulmonary
and critical care where do I go to look
at it and I think that that's the
reality of what we're gonna see unless
we take some unprecedented actions and
we embrace it as a community as a
country that if we can buckle down and
rise to this moment we can help mitigate
how long we have to live in that reality
we are going to be in this for a while
we have to accept that but for how long
is up to our actions today and ideally
the actions of this administration to
make testing rapid much more widely
available they held a press conference
week ago saying that we were gonna be
scaling up tests immediately we still
don't have those it takes two days still
I mean at least to turnaround the test
we still have we have eight over eight
thousand cases in America over a hundred
and fifty deaths now almost 9,000 cases
150 deaths and we are still testing at
about you know I think it's something
like 500 Americans for every million
people South Korea was testing you know
at five thousand for every hundred for
every million it's just we will not get
control without more information and and
without better leadership to guide us
dr. Kerry it's willie Geist we can't
give thanks big enough to you and all of
your colleagues in the health care
worker community for what you're doing
right now on the frontlines I know
you're about to go in yourself in terms
of equipment and in terms of things you
need gloves masks respirators
ventilators I guess the question for a
lot of Americans is why don't we have
enough of those things I understand that
this is a huge ask that the Pentagon can
release what it can release but a lot of
those reserves are for something
targeted a big event in New York City
and they suddenly need a thousand
ventilators they're not for every
Hospital across the country so what can
happen as of this morning what could the
federal government do as of this morning
to get at least the gloves and the masks
and that protective equipment that you
need into your hands so you can get to
work well there's a couple things I
think one I think releasing the you know
releasing the supplies it's going to be
critically important but that's a
stopgap right we are going to need
millions of masks millions of gloves and
what we have just been released is only
going to get a fraction of us there it
might buy us a little bit of time but
the reality is we never expected we
never thought that we could be
vulnerable to pandemic of this size with
the work that I do with Steve Global
Health has always believed that health
security is national security and it's
critically important to invest in health
systems around the world because we're
only as strong as our weakest link we
never thought that we could be that
weakest link
but the reality is that now that we're
there what we have to do is to scale up
production and also some of my
colleagues are some of the most foremost
public health professionals have
identified massive sources of mass and
PPE available in China now
as they have finally reported no cases
as of yesterday for the first time no
new cases that are available but we have
trade you know tariffs and and bans that
are in place that aren't making it
possible for that equipment to be
available that is irresponsible in this
moment of crisis right now we need to be
creative we need to be bold and I think
that I'm very hopeful that we can get
ourselves there sooner rather than later
so that we're not dealing with this for
you know in two years that we're dealing
with this hopefully only into the summer
and and in a place where we can start to
catch our breath a little bit before we
potentially get a second wave in in the
fall this is here to stay though the
question is how bad and for how long
so dr. Dave this is here to stay that's
for sure I'm hearing everything from
different waves of this to shutdowns
becoming a part of life for several
years we don't know what's to come but
this is clearly here and the numbers are
beginning to double in certain
localities as we get testing the
president has deployed two Navy wartime
ships to service hospitals but the
understanding is that that will take
other patients that can't fit into
hospitals anymore due to the influx of
coronavirus patients and they won't be
ready for a few weeks and then there's
the the Act that he passed that allows
him to direct industry to produce
critical equipment to confront this
crisis none of this seems like it's
happening right now it still feels like
we're weeks potentially months off from
being up to speed in confronting this
crisis yes mica the the there are a few
solutions none of them very good but one
dr. Kerry mentioned is to scale up
production scaling up production of
ventilators in the United States can
happen but every ventilator used in
every hospital in this country is under
the FDA regulation they'd nobody
manufactures and uses a ventilator here
that's not tightly regulated by the FDA
special exemptions to allow some of the
older ventilators that are still safe
to be utilized or manufactured may help
and also we heard that there are 10,000
there's a massive stockpile of
ventilators and equipment that is
perhaps more a virtual stockpile
my sources tell me that there is not a
single warehouse somewhere with 10,000
ventilators they're spread out over
storage rooms and places in hospitals
many of them older so we really have to
look closely at how to expand and scale
up the use of existing safe at
ventilators the manufacturer and a
collection of safe ventilators from
wherever they are to see if we can catch
up we we have about two weeks we have
some time but beyond that and dr. Kerry
may agree beyond two weeks we really
don't know where this country will be
people you know we need to be meet
people who know how to use those
ventilators too and that's the
centerpiece of this and that's the layer
of educating doctors maybe young doctor
medical assistants because we're gonna
lose people at the rate we're going the
numbers are doubling every few days dr.
Dave Campbell and dr. Vanessa Kerry
thank you both and coming up a sea
change for Republicans who once opposed
bailouts the Washington Post's Bob
Costas earns us with what he calls
president Trump's one trillion dollar
gamble for re-election thanks for
checking out MSNBC on YouTube and make
sure you subscribe to stay up-to-date on
the day's biggest stories and you can
click on any of the videos around us to
watch more 4 Morning Joe and MSNBC
thanks so much for watching